# Handwriting-Detection-In-ML
Machine learning and deep learning plays an important role in computer technology and artificial intelligence. With the use of deep learning and machine learning, human effort can be reduced in recognizing, learning, predictions and many more areas. This article presents recognizing the handwritten digits (0 to 9) from the famous MNIST dataset, comparing classifiers like KNN, PSVM, NN and convolution neural network on basis of performance, accuracy, time, sensitivity, positive productivity, and specificity with using different parameters with the classifiers.
Digit recognition system is the working of a machine to train itself or recognizing the digits from different sources like emails, bank cheque, papers, images, etc. and in different real-world scenarios for online handwriting recognition on computer tablets or system, recognize number plates of vehicles, processing bank cheque amounts, numeric entries in forms filled up by hand (say — tax forms) and so on.
The handwritten digits are not always of the same size, width, orientation and justified to margins as they differ from writing of person to person, so the general problem would be while classifying the digits due to the similarity between digits such as 1 and 7, 5 and 6, 3 and 8, 2 and 5, 2 and 7, etc. This problem is faced more when many people write a single digit with a variety of different handwritings. Lastly, the uniqueness and variety in the handwriting of different individuals also influence the formation and appearance of the digits. Now we introduce the concepts and algorithms of deep learning and machine learning.
MNIST Dataset:
--------------------
Samples provided from MNIST (Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology) dataset includes handwritten digits total of 70,000 images consisting of 60,000 examples in training set and 10,000 examples in testing set, both with labeled images from 10 digits (0 to 9). This is a small segment form the wide set from NIST where size was normalized to fit a 20*20 pixel box and not altering the aspect ratio. Handwritten digits are images in the form of 28*28 gray scale intensities of images representing an image along with the first column to be a label (0 to 9) for every image. The same has opted for the case of the testing set as 10,000 images with a label of 0 to 9.

Yann Lecun, Corinna Cortes, and Christopher Burges developed this MNIST dataset for evaluating and improving machine learning models on the handwritten digit classification problem. The MNIST dataset was developed from the special dataset from NIST with special database 3 (United States Census Bureau employees) and special database 1 (high school students) which consist with the binary images of handwritten digits. Earlier SD-3 (special database -3) was considered as training and SD-1 (special database -1) as testing set with easier recognizing level of SD-3. Therefore to keep it challenging, disjoint and fair among different learning classifiers, NIST dataset was mixed up. Division of the MNIST took place by 30,000 samples from SD-3 and 30,000 samples from SD- 1 with 250 writers approx. and 5,000 samples from SD-3 and remaining 5,000 samples from SD-1 to form a different test set. Images of digits were taken from various scanned digits, normalized in size and justify as centered. This makes it an excellent dataset for evaluating models and allowing the machine learning aspirant to focus on deep learning and machine learning with very little data cleaning.

Talking about the newer or more modified version which is similar to the standard MNIST, an EMNIST or Extended MNIST have been emerged out in the year 2017 with the samples of 2, 40,000 images in training set along with increment to 40,000 images in the testing set consisting of handwritten digits.
